Title: Neil VossNeil Voss (born October 7, 1974) is a video game composer.

Voss' first recognized work was on Tetrisphere for Nintendo 64 in 1997, an acclaimed effort that earned him a "Best Soundtrack" award from Nintendo Power for that year. Later he composed tracks for The New Tetris in 1999, also for Nintendo 64. Voss later moved to working on the Game Boy Advance, producing soundtracks for Racing Gears Advance in collaboration with Orbital Media Inc. Many of his compositions for the Commodore 64 are available in The High Voltage SID Collection.

== Background ==
At the early age of 12, Neil Voss began playing with electronic music on his Commodore 64 and this hobby soon became a big part of his life. He later became an underground electronic music developer, but saw his fellow composers signing to game developers, and so he joined H2O, a third-party developer for Atari's Jaguar. His first project was Phear, but after Jaguar failed, it was moved to Nintendo and expanded into Tetrisphere. As audio director, Voss produced, composed, and engineered the whole soundtrack for Tetrisphere, which some say made the game a hit.IGN: Composing Tetrisphere Voss went on to create more hit techno music in the N64 puzzle game, The New Tetris. This soundtrack became an instant favorite.Fathers of the U.S. Gaming Industry 2001

Later, in 2005, Voss worked on Racing Gears Advance for Game Boy Advance. which won for "Best Use of Sound" by IGN.IGN.com presents The Best of 2005

== References ==
*Composing Tetrisphere – Interview with Neil Voss (Part I) at IGN on June 15, 1998
*Interview With Neil Voss (Part II) at IGN on June 16, 1998
*Neil Voss: The Melody Behind the Addiction – Interview with Voss at Nintendojo


== External links ==
*Performing at Blip Festival in 2006 (video), courtesy of 2PlayerProductions
*List of Neil Voss' songs at Last.fm
*




Category:1974 births
Category:American male composers
Category:21st-century American composers
Category:Living people
Category:Video game composers
Category:People from Tampa, Florida
Category:Musicians from Tampa, Florida
Category:21st-century American male musicians


