Title: Bergen Point

  
Bergen Point is a point of land that lends its name to the adjacent neighborhood in Bayonne in Hudson County, New Jersey, United States.Locality Search , State of New Jersey. Accessed February 7, 2015. The point is located on the north side of Kill van Kull at Newark Bay. It is the section of the city closest to the Bayonne Bridge. Historically the term has been used more broadly as synonymous with Constable Hook, from which it is geographically separated at Port Johnson.

== History ==
The area was connected to Staten Island with a ferry as early as the late 17th century, and was later developed as a resort.Bergen Point In the late 18th century it became more prominent as a ferry landing for travelers between New York City and Philadelphia.Paulus Hook Ferry  An 1837 US government coastal survey map identifies it as Vanhorn Point,NOAA Coastal Survey file T18.jpg, available at  and attached to Wikipedia article on Curries Woods.  reflecting the name of a Dutch family that occupied the area just to the north called Pamrapo (among many other spellings, roughly today's Curries Woods neighborhood in Greenville) from the mid-17th century. The Bergen Point Lighthouse, built offshore in 1849, was demolished and replaced with a skeletal tower in the mid 20th century.Bergen Point Lighthouse, 1849-1949, New Jersey Lighthouse Society.  A charter was granted for the construction of The Jersey City and Bergen Point Plank Road in 1851.Laws of the State of New Jersey, 1811, pp. 337–340

Governor of New Jersey Jon Corzine announced on May 6, 2006, that funding was in place to extend the Hudson-Bergen Light Rail system to Eighth Street. Work was completed and the station opened in January 2011.Frassinelli, Mike. "NJ Transit opens Bayonne 8th Street Station, extending Hudson-Bergen Light Rail service", The Star-Ledger, January 31, 2011. Accessed August 25, 2013.

A large portion of the point was once site of a Texaco plant, which was cleared and is slated to become a residential and recreational area along Newark Bay and Kill Van Kull.1,200 housing units, recreation facilities planned for former Texaco site in Bayonne Jersey Journal, Sept 2015 Other former industrial sites are slated for mixed-use development. In 2022, the construction of a major studio at was announced. Called 1888 Studios, it will be the largest in New Jersey.

The renovated Collins Park and walkways along the new developments are part of the Hackensack RiverWalk.

==Gallery==
 
The Latourette House, Bergen Point, New Jersey.jpg|The Latourette House in Bergen Point was the birthplace of Samuel Francis Du Pont
NEWARK BAY, NEW JERSEY. LANDS ADJACENT TO THE BIGHT, RIVERS FLOWING INTO IT, AND BAYS AND ESTUARIES EDGING IT HAVE... - NARA - 555764.jpg|Bergen Point, 1974
Bergen Point Station Bayonne.JPG|The point lends its name to the neighborhood


==See also==
*Bergen Neck
*Hackensack RiverWalk
*Geography of New York–New Jersey Harbor Estuary
*Port of New York and New Jersey

