Title: Sandbæk Report
The Sandbæk ReportReport on the proposal for a European Parliament and Council regulation on aid for policies and actions on reproductive and sexual health and rights in developing countries (COM(2002) 120 – C5‑0114/2002–2002/0052(COD)) was a report authored by Ulla Sandbæk that after being passed by the European ParliamentEuropean Parliament legislative resolution on the proposal for a European Parliament and Council regulation on aid for policies and actions on reproductive and sexual health and rights in developing countries (COM(2002) 120 – C5-0114/2002–2002/0052(COD)) is now a European Union regulation titled Aid for Policies and Actions on Reproductive and Sexual Health and Rights in Developing Countries.Health in developing countries: aid for policies and actions on reproductive and sexual health and rights (repeal. regul. 1484/97/EC)

Anti-abortion groups and the Catholic ChurchEU funds must not be used for abortions in developing countries, Commission of the Bishop's Conferences of the European Commission, Press Release, 13 February 2003 claim that the report compels all European Union member states to fund overseas abortion services through their foreign aid budgets.EU compels nations to fund abortion by Dominic Baster, Pro-Life Times, March 2003 They claim that the language of the report"The regulation mandates the EU to provide money to promote "the recognition of reproductive and sexual health and rights ... including ... universal access to a comprehensive range of safe and reliable reproductive and sexual health care and services". According to the World Health Organization's definition, 'reproductive health care services' include abortion." EU compels nations to fund abortion by Dominic Baster, Pro-Life Times, March 2003 by talking of "universal access to a comprehensive range of safe and reliable reproductive and sexual health care and services" includes abortion under the World Health Organization definition,"Sexual health is influenced by a complex web of factors ranging from sexual behaviour and attitudes and societal factors, to biological risk and genetic predisposition. It encompasses the problems of HIV and STIs/RTIs, unintended pregnancy and abortion, infertility and cancer resulting from STIs, and sexual dysfunction." Gender and reproductive rights, World Health Organization website, retrieved 17 September 2006 and that this was admitted by Ulla Sandbæk in a radio interview."Ulla Sandbaek, a pro-abortion MEP, told Ireland's Radio Kerry on 19th November that abortion would be funded by the EU and that this was legally possible because it was in tune with the language of the UN's 1994 Cairo conference on population." Ireland may fund abortion in poorest countries, Statement by Dana Rosemary Scallon hosted on the website of "Truth TV"

An amendment preventing the use of European Union aid to finance abortions was defeated.The European Parliament adopts the Sandbaeck report, report by euro-fam The increase in funding of 150% was contrasted to a 2.3% overall increase in the aid budget.It is currently proposed that this new Regulation should be the subject of an annual budget of €20 millions after 2003. A nearly 150% increase from funding levels under the current Regulation set at €8.1 millions for 2002. As the overall EU development budget is currently at a virtual standstill (only a 2.3% increase proposed for 2003) this can only be achieved by diverting funding from other areas of overseas aid. SANDBAEK REPORT Giving Aid or Pushing an Agenda? (PLENARY EDITION) (Document format), Care for Europe

The policy was intended, in part, to replace some of the U.S. funding lost due to the Mexico City Policy, the U.S. policy under the George W. Bush administration which prohibited funding of abortion through foreign aid, particularly reversing the de-funding of the United Nations Population Fund.The EU press office prematurely announced that UNFPA funding would be increased by "32 million euros in aid" to replace, at least part, of the US funding. EU Pledge To UN Population Control Now Delayed Following Disquiet Among Parliamentarians, Catholic World News, 3 October 2002 The European commissioner Poul Nielson said that the European Union wished to "fill the decency gap" left by the Mexico City policy."I should like to respond to Mrs Sandbæk's remarks concerning the negative impact of the Mexico City Policy carried out by the Bush Administration in Washington. I agree with the choice of wording put forward by Mrs Sandbæk. We have reacted to this policy, which was announced when President Bush took office, by saying clearly that Europe is ready and willing to fill the decency gap, and that is what we are doing."  

