Title: Raksi


Raksi (Devanagari:रक्सी) or Rakshi (Bantawa language: Hengmawa/Hengma, Limbu language: Sijongwaa aara,Ethnic Fermented Foods and Alcoholic Beverages of Asia, Front Cover By Jyoti Prakash Tamang, Springer, 5 Aug 2016 - Technology & Engineering, P.107 Nepal Bhasa: aila) is the Nepali term for a traditional distilled alcoholic beverage in Nepal, India (Darjeeling, Sikkim) and Tibet. It is often made at home.

Raksi is a strong drink, clear like vodka or gin, tasting somewhat like Japanese sake. It is usually made from kodo millet (kodo) or rice; different grains produce different flavors.  It is made by distilling a chhaang, a brewed alcoholic drink.The Rough Guide to Nepal, Apa Publications (UK), 2018 .
The Limbus and Kirati people , for whom it is a traditional beverage,p.67 Land and Social Change in East Nepal: A Study of Hindu-Tribal Relations. Lionel Caplan. drink tongba and raksi served with pieces of pork, water buffalo or goat meat sekuwa.p.34 Kinship and Marriage Among the Limbu of Eastern Nepal: A Study. Rex Lee Jones - 1973 For the Newars, aila is indispensable during festivals and various religious rituals as libation, prasad or sagan.

In CNN's list of the world's 50 most delicious drinks, raksi was ranked 41st and was described as follows: "made from millet or rice, raksi is strong on the nose and sends a burning sensation straight down your throat that resolves itself into a surprisingly smooth, velvety sensation. Nepalese drink this home brew to celebrate festivals, though some think that the prized drink itself is the reason to celebrate." 

Because of its popularity, various temperance movements exist in Nepal, including various women's groups. Raksi, however, remains an important requirement of various religious rituals and social events, due in part perhaps to its antiseptic properties.

GC-MS based metabolomics revealed medicinal compounds present in raksi collected from high altitudes of Singalila Ridge of the Himalayas. Study claims raksi contains compounds which are useful as a remedy of high altitudes sickness.

==Serving==
thumb|right|250px|Raksi distillery in Nepal
Raksi is often served in a bhatti glass and during special occasions, the drink is poured from a great height via a pitcher with a small spout, making an entertaining spectacle.

==Production==
Raksi is produced, sold and mostly consumed at rustic distilleries scattered around the countryside. Usually it is not aged before consumption. A large amount of wood is used in the distillation process.

==See also==
* Alcohol in Nepal
* Ara, a Bhutanese drink
* Chhaang, a Tibetan and Nepalese drink
* List of Tibetan dishes

