Title: Hakea laurina

thumb|Detail showing crimson flower head

Hakea laurina is shrub or small tree commonly known as kodjet or pin-cushion hakea and is endemic to Western Australia.  The Noongar name for the plant is kodjet or kojet. It has red and cream conspicuous globular flowers and lance shaped leaves. 

==Description==
Hakea laurina  is an upright shrub or small tree with smooth grey bark,  high,  wide and does not form a lignotuber. The inflorescence consists of 120-190 conspicuous  white, deep pink or red pin cushion shaped flowers in the leaf axils. The pedicels are  long and smooth.  The perianth is dark pink to red, the pistil  long, cream-white or occasionally red or dark pink. The flower buds are enclosed in scale-like bracts. Flowering occurs from April to July.  The leaves are simple, slightly blue green, flat, smooth, margins entire, lance or egg-shaped and taper to a blunt point at the tip. The leaves are
arranged alternately along the branches,  long,  wide on a stem  long and narrowing at the base. The fruit are in clusters of 1-10 per axil,   long,  wide, egg-shaped, smooth, occasionally with rough pitting and ending in a short beak. 

==Taxonomy and naming==
Hakea laurina was first formally described 1830 by Robert Brown and the description was published in Supplementum primum prodromi florae Novae Hollandiae. The specific epithet is derived from the Latin laurus with reference to the resemblance of the leaves to laurel.


==Distribution==
Pincushion hakea occurs in the sandplains of the coastal southwest of Australia, the northernmost range being Narrogin and extending east to Esperance. The habitat is often sandplains, sometimes occurring on sandy clay; most recorded specimens are in the southern districts of its botanical province.

==Cultivation==
The plant, which is propagated from seeds, is used in cultivation in the eastern states of Australia, and as a hedging or street plant in America and Italy.  Adaptable to a number of soil types, the plant is also tolerant of frost. The uses of this species include ornament and shading in public streets, wildlife habitat, windbreaks, and control of soil erosion.

In the language of flowers, Hakea laurina symbolises nobility and longevity.

