Title: Sharpe's grysbok

Sharpe's or northern grysbok (Raphicerus sharpei) is a small, shy, solitary antelope that is found from tropical to south-eastern Africa.

==Range==
They are found in the Transvaal (South Africa), the Caprivi Strip (Namibia), Botswana, Mozambique, Zimbabwe, Zambia, Malawi and Tanzania to Lake Victoria.

==Description==
It is similar in size to the gray duiker, but has a stockier body and shaggy fur over the hindquarters. It stands about 20" (45–60 cm) at the shoulders and weighs only 7–11.5 kg. Its coat is reddish-brown streaked with white; eye-rings, muzzle, throat and underside are off-white. The males have stubby horns, which are widely spaced. Sharpe's grysbok has a short, deep muzzle with large mouth and heavy molars for grinding. The short neck and head on a long-legged body result in a high-rumped posture when browsing.

==Habits==
Although widespread, Sharpe's grysbok is infrequently seen. Males and females seem to form brief associations, but the species is usually encountered singly. Territory is marked with dung middens. Their habitat is rocky hill country, but preferring fertile zones on the lower slopes. They are nocturnal browsers and spend the day in the protective cover of tall grass or shrubs. They are extremely timid and will run away at the first sign of anything unusual, although this flight is accompanied "short stamping hops";Kingdon, Jonathan. 1997. The Kingdon Field Guide to African Mammals. Academic Press, San Diego & London. Pp. 386-387. () they move well away from where the disturbance occurred before stopping (unlike steenbok, which stop and look back).Smithers, Reay H.N. 1971. The Mammals of Botswana. Museum Memoir No. 4. The Trustees of the National Museum of Rhodesia, Salisbury [Harare], Rhodesia [Zimbabwe]. Pp. 221–222. Sharpe's Grysbok are reported to take refuge in aardvark burrows, like steenbok.

Sharpe's grysbok browse on leaves, buds, herb and fruits—in the dry season, their food is typically tough (for which their teeth and jaws are adapted). Grazed grass makes up about 30% of their diet. Like the Cape grysbok they use a communal latrine and mark sticks in its vicinity with pre-orbital gland secretions.

==Taxonomy==

The closely related Cape (or southern) grysbok (R. melanotis) occurs in the western Cape region. Haltenorth and DillerHaltenorth, Theodor and Helmut Diller. 1980. A Field Guide to the Mammals of Africa including Madagascar. Collins, London. Pp. 53–54. () consider R. sharpei as a subspecies of R. melanotis.

== References ==


:Ellerman, J.R., T.C.S. Morrison-Scott and R.W. Hayman. 1953. Southern African Mammals 1758 to 1951: A Reclassification. British Museum (Natural History), London. P. 186.

== External links ==
* Photos of Sharpe's Grysbok




Category:Dwarf antelopes
Category:Mammals of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
Category:Mammals of South Africa
Category:Mammals of Namibia
Category:Mammals of Botswana
Category:Mammals of Zambia
Category:Mammals of Zimbabwe
Category:Mammals of Eswatini
Category:Mammals of Mozambique
Category:Fauna of East Africa
Category:Mammals of Tanzania
Category:Mammals described in 1897
Category:Mammals of Malawi
Category:Taxa named by Oldfield Thomas