Title: Tewksbury Township Schools



The Tewksbury Township Schools is a community public school district which operates two schools serving students in kindergarten through eighth grade from Tewksbury Township, in Hunterdon County, New Jersey, United States.School Choice, Tewksbury Township Schools. Accessed September 2, 2020. "The Tewksbury Township School District is a Pre-K through 8 district comprised of two schools with a current enrollment of approximately 511 students. The Tewksbury Elementary School has been recognized as a National Blue Ribbon School of Excellence for 2011 and serves our students in grades K-5. The Kindergarten Program is a full day program. The Old Turnpike School serves our students in grades 6 through 8."2019-2020 Public School Directory, Hunterdon County Department of Education. Accessed September 2, 2020.

As of the 2018–19 school year, the district, comprised of two schools, had an enrollment of 541 students and 60.4 classroom teachers (on an FTE basis), for a student–teacher ratio of 9.0:1.District information for Tewksbury Township School District, National Center for Education Statistics. Accessed April 1, 2020.

The district is classified by the New Jersey Department of Education as being in District Factor Group "J", the-highest of eight groupings. District Factor Groups organize districts statewide to allow comparison by common socioeconomic characteristics of the local districts. From lowest socioeconomic status to highest, the categories are A, B, CD, DE, FG, GH, I and J.NJ Department of Education District Factor Groups (DFG) for School Districts, New Jersey Department of Education. Accessed September 22, 2014.

Public school students in ninth through twelfth grades attend Voorhees High School in Lebanon Township (although the mailing address is Glen Gardner), which also serves students from Califon Borough, Glen Gardner Borough, Hampton Borough, High Bridge Borough and Lebanon Township.Voorhees High School 2015 Report Card Narrative, New Jersey Department of Education. Accessed June 3, 2016. "Voorhees High School has consistently ranked among the top high schools in New Jersey and was named a National Blue Ribbon School in 2015. With an enrollment of 1,095 students in grades 9-12, the school serves the communities of Califon, Glen Gardner, Hampton, High Bridge, Lebanon Township, and Tewksbury Township." As of the 2018–19 school year, the high school had an enrollment of 982 students and 83.1 classroom teachers (on an FTE basis), for a student–teacher ratio of 11.8:1.School data for Voorhees High School, National Center for Education Statistics. Accessed April 1, 2020. The school is part of the North Hunterdon-Voorhees Regional High School District, which also includes students from Bethlehem Township, Clinton Town, Clinton Township, Franklin Township, Lebanon Borough and Union Township who attend North Hunterdon High School in Annandale.About the North Hunterdon-Voorhees Regional High School District, North Hunterdon-Voorhees Regional High School District. Accessed January 4, 2015. "North Hunterdon High School educates students from: Bethlehem Township, Clinton Town, Clinton Township, Franklin Township, Lebanon Borough, Union Township; Voorhees High School educates students from: Califon, Glen Gardner, Hampton, High Bridge, Lebanon Township, Tewksbury Township"Information Regarding Choice of District School, North Hunterdon-Voorhees Regional High School District. Accessed January 4, 2015. "In the past, parents and students of the North Hunterdon High School sending districts were able to select either North Hunterdon High School or Voorhees High School as their school of choice.... As our student population continued to grow and our two high schools reached, and exceeded, 90% capacity, the option of choosing Voorhees was eliminated in the 2005-2006 school year for the North Hunterdon sending districts (Bethlehem Township, Clinton Township, Franklin Township, Lebanon Borough and Union Township – Clinton Town students still have choice as they are classmates at Clinton Public School with Glen Gardner students, who attend Voorhees)."About the District, North Hunterdon-Voorhees Regional High School District. Accessed January 4, 2015. "North Hunterdon High School educates students from: Bethlehem Township, Clinton Town, Clinton Township, Franklin Township, Lebanon Borough, Union Township; Voorhees High School educates students from: Califon, Glen Gardner, Hampton, High Bridge, Lebanon Township, Tewksbury Township"

==History==
The community's original elementary school, Sawmill, opened in 1951 and was sold in 2003 for $1 million to the Hunterdon County Educational Services Commission.Staff. "Tewksbury school board to sell Sawmill School", New Jersey Hills, July 30, 2003. Accessed September 22, 2014. "Under the terms of the negotiated agreement, which school officials are hoping to finalize by the end of August, the Hunterdon County Educational Services Commission would pay $1 million for the circa-1950s school that is located on seven acres."

==Awards and recognition==
Tewksbury Elementary School was recognized in 2011 as a Blue Ribbon School by the United States Department of Education.National Blue Ribbon Schools Program Schools Recognized 1982 through 2016, United States Department of Education. Accessed February 17, 2017.

Old Turnpike School was one of nine schools in New Jersey honored in 2020 by the National Blue Ribbon Schools Program, which recognizes high student achievement.2020 National Blue Ribbon Schools All Public and Non-Public Schools, National Blue Ribbon Schools Program. Accessed September 27, 2020.Clark, Adam. "9 N.J. schools just won a huge national honor", NJ Advance Media for NJ.com, September 24, 2020. Accessed September 27, 2020. "Nine New Jersey public schools have been awarded the national Blue Ribbon designation, one of the highest honors in education. The schools were recognized Thursday by the U.S. Department of Education for high student achievement."

==Schools==
Schools in the district (with 2018–19 enrollment data from the National Center for Education StatisticsSchool Data for the Tewksbury Township Schools, National Center for Education Statistics. Accessed April 1, 2020.) are:Schools, Tewksbury Township Board of Education. Accessed September 2, 2020.New Jersey School Directory for the Tewksbury Township Schools, New Jersey Department of Education. Accessed December 29, 2016. 
;Elementary school
*Tewksbury Elementary SchoolTewksbury Elementary School, Tewksbury Township Schools. Accessed September 2, 2020. with 321 students in grades PreK - 4
**Kathryn Lemerich, Principal
*Old Turnpike SchoolOld Turnpike School, Tewksbury Township Board of Education. Accessed September 2, 2020. with 214 students in grades 5 - 8
**Michael Mitchell, Principal

==Administration==
Core members of the district's administration are:Central Office Administration, Tewksbury Township Schools. Accessed September 2, 2020.New Jersey School Directory for Hunterdon County, New Jersey Department of Education. Accessed December 29, 2016.
*Dr. Jennifer Shouffler, Superintendent
*Lori Tirone, Business Administrator / Board Secretary

==Board of education==
The district's board of education, comprised of nine members, sets policy and oversees the fiscal and educational operation of the district through its administration. As a Type II school district, the board's trustees are elected directly by voters to serve three-year terms of office on a staggered basis, with three seats up for election each year held (since 2012) as part of the November general election. The board appoints a superintendent to oversee the day-to-day operation of the district.New Jersey Boards of Education by District Election Types - 2018 School Election, New Jersey Department of Education, updated February 16, 2018. Accessed January 26, 2020.Comprehensive Annual Financial Report of the Tewksbury Township School District, New Jersey Department of Education, for year ending June 30, 2019. Accessed September 2, 2020. "The Tewksbury Township School District is a Type II district located in the County of Hunterdon, State of New Jersey. As a Type II district, the School District functions independently through a Board of Education. The board is comprised of nine members elected to three-year terms. The purpose of the district is to educate students in grades K-8."Board of Education Members, Tewksbury Township Schools. Accessed September 2, 2020.

