Title: Castelnau, London


Castelnau is a road in Barnes, in the London Borough of Richmond upon Thames, south west London, approximately  west from Charing Cross on the south side of the River Thames. About  long, it is the main road south from Hammersmith Bridge and forms part of the A306 road. It was originally named Upper Bridge Road.The History of Castelnau, Holy Trinity Barnes, 1968 The name Castelnau is also used informally for Castelnau Estate and the area surrounding the road.

An area of Barnes including Castelnau was designated a conservation area in 1977.

==Etymology==
Castelnau takes its name from Castelnau-Valence, near Nîmes in France: in 1691, the 10th Baron of Castelnau and St Croix, a Huguenot, fled France for England following persecution,  and his son, Charles Boileau, settled in north Barnes and his descendants developed parts of the area. Maurice Boileau, the other son of the 10th Baron, stayed in the Castle and his descendants still live in the castle.

Castelnau means "new castle" in the Occitan language.

==Pronunciation==
Three different English pronunciations of the word "Castelnau" seem to be in current use, all differing only in the final syllable.   is more ancient, and resembles the original French vowel;   is perhaps used to match with Nassau Road in the area; and   is favoured by more recent inhabitants.

==History==
Castelnau was developed after the opening of Hammersmith Bridge in 1827.

Major Charles Lestock Boileau built Castelnau Villas (now 84–122 and 91–125 Castelnau), designed by the architect William Laxton, in 1842, followed by rows of cottages called Castelnau Row, Castelnau Place and Gothic Cottages. After his death in 1889, Upper Bridge Road was renamed Castelnau.
thumb|left|Castelnau Estate, Barnes

===Castelnau Estate===

In 1926, London County Council built a cottage estate of 640 houses, called Castelnau Estate, on the site of a market garden.Maisie Brown: Barnes and Mortlake Past with East Sheen, Historical Publications Ltd,  In 1971 these passed to ownership of Richmond upon Thames Council. Many are now privately owned. Many of the roads in this estate are named after Deans of St. Paul's who had been Lords of the manor of Barnes between the 14th and 17th centuries: Everdon, Kilmington, Alderbury, Kentwode, Howsman and Stillingfleet.
thumb|Classical housing in Castelnau

==Notable buildings==


Castelnau is noted for 20 pairs of exceptional classical villas which were built in 1842 by Major Boileau (see above). There are also two churches:
* Holy Trinity Barnes
* Catholic Church of St Osmund, Barnes

From around the time of World War II to 1987, the art dealership Abbott and Holder operated a gallery in the house at 73 Castelnau, which was also the home of the founder, Robert Abbott.

