Title: Drymobius margaritiferus


Drymobius margaritiferus, commonly known as the speckled racer, is a species of nonvenomous colubrid snake native to the Americas. The specific name, margaritiferus, means "pearl-bearing" in Latin, referring to the pearl-like spots on the dorsal scales.

==Geographic range and habitat==
This species ranges throughout Central America from the Isthmus of Tehuantepec and Yucatán Peninsula southward to Panama and adjacent areas of northwest Colombia, occurring at elevations from sea level up to 4,750 feet (1,453 m.). Northward it is found in the coastal lowlands and lower exterior slopes of the Sierra Madres of Mexico, up the west coast to Sonora, and up the east coast to northern Tamaulipas. The northern limit of its distribution ranges into extreme south Texas, USA where it is uncommon to rare in a few of the southernmost counties of the state.Werler, John E. and James R. Dixon.  2000. Texas Snakes: Identification, Distribution, and Natural History. University of Texas Press. Austin, Texas. xv, 417 pp. Köhler, Gunther. 2008. Reptiles of Central America, 2nd. ed. Herpeton Verlag. Offenbach, Germany. 460 pp. 

It occurs in a wide variety of habitats, including forest, forest edges and clearings, secondary growth, riparian zones,  savannahs, marshlands, pastures, and roadsides.Savage, J. M. 2002. The Amphibians and Reptiles of Costa Rica, A Herpetofauna between Two Continents, between Two Seas. University of Chicago Press, Chicago, Illinois. xx, 934 pp. It is often said to favor humid and wet areas with permanent water sourcesLee, J. C. 1996. The Amphibians and Reptiles of the Yucatán Peninsula. Comstock Publishing Associates, Cornell University Press, Ithaca, New York. xii, 500 pp.  however, these snakes have been found in areas where no water was apparent and habitats include tropical dry forest and tropical arid forest,Wilson, Larry David, and John R. Meyer. 1985. The Snakes of Honduras, 2nd. ed. Milwaukee Public Museum. x, 150 pp. Farr, William L. and David Lazcano (2011). Natural History Notes: Drymobius margaritiferus, Thanatosis. Herpological Review, 42(4); 613.McCranie, J. R. 2011. The Snakes of Honduras: Systematics, Distribution, and Conservation.. Contributions to Herpetology, Vol. 26. Society for the Study of Amphibians and Reptiles. x, 714 pp.  In Costa Rica it is described as " ubiquitous in all but the most humid lowland and pre-montane zones" including dry lowland forest.

==Description==
left|thumb|Drymobius margaritiferus
The speckled racer is typically black in color with distinctive yellow and blue spotting, one light-colored spot on each scale, 365 pp. (Drymobius margaritiferus, pp. 131-133, Figure 31.) which gives the snake an overall greenish hue. The labials are yellow, with black sutures. The underside is typically yellow to green. They average 30–40 in. (76–102 cm) in length, record 50 in. (127 cm). 429 pp.  (paperback). (Drymobius margaritiferus, p. 186 + Plate 32 + Map 142.)

The dorsal scales, which are feebly keeled middorsally, but smooth on the flanks, are arranged in 17 rows. The ventrals number 142-168; the subcaudals, 85-126.Smith, H.M.; E.D. Brodie, Jr. (1982). Reptiles of North America: A Guide to Field Identification. New York: Golden Press. 240 pp.  (paperback). (Drymobius margaritiferus, pp. 188-189.)

==Natural history==
As the name "racer" implies, it is a fast, agile, and predominantly a diurnal species. It has been described as a nervous species and will not hesitate to bite in self defensive when restrained or handled. 
Death feigning behavior, or thanatosis, was reported for two out of seven (28.5%) specimens that were caught and handled during field surveys conducted in Tamaulipas, Mexico.

They will consume a wide variety of prey, but primarily feed on frogs and toads. One study of 36 Guatemalan and Mexican specimens with food items in their stomachs found 86%  had anurans (predominantly Eleutherodactylus), 8% lizards, 4% reptiles eggs, and 2% small mammals.Seib, R. L. (1984). Prey use in three syntopic neotropical racers. Journal of Herpetology. 18(4): 412-420. Juveniles are known to eat insects.

They are oviparous typically laying eggs in the spring, although in southern areas it is known to deposit eggs as early as February and March. Clutch size range from two to eight eggs that are usually 1.5 inches (3.8 cm.) in length. Incubation is typically eight to nine weeks with hatchling measuring six to ten and a half inches  (15.2-27.6 cm.) long.

==Subspecies==
There are four recognized subspecies of D. margaritiferus:

* Drymobius m. margaritiferus (Schlegel, 1837), Northern speckled racer:Liner, Ernest A. and Gustavo Cass-Andreu. (2008). Standard Spanish, English and Scientific Names of the Amphibians and Reptiles of Mexico (2nd. ed.). Herpetological Circular No. 38. Society for the Study of Amphibians and Reptiles. iv, 162 pp.  Atlantic versant, Texas to Colombia and sections of Pacific in Chiapas, Mexico and southern range.
* Drymobius m. fistulosus H.M. Smith, 1942 Central American speckled racer: Pacific versant from southern Sonora to the Isthmus of Tehuantepec.
* Drymobius m. occidentalis Bocourt, 1890 Western speckled racer: Pacific versant from eastern Chiapas, Mexico to El Salvador.
* Drymobius m. maydis Villa, 1968The Reptile Database. www.reptile-database.org. Corn Islands, Nicaragua.

==Conservation status==
The speckled racer is a threatened species in the state of Texas, USA where it is uncommon to rare. In some regions of Mexico and Central America it is a common species.

