Title: Lido 14




The Lido 14 is an American sailing dinghy that was designed by Barney Lehman and William D. Schock and first built in 1958.Sherwood, Richard M.: A Field Guide to Sailboats of North America, Second Edition, pages 40-41. Houghton Mifflin Company, 1994. 

The design was derived from the Lehman 14.

==Production==
The design is built by W. D. Schock Corp in the United States. When it was introduced it became a quick commercial success, with 1,000 boats completed in the first three years and almost 3,000 by 1970. The success of the design was instrumental in the company expanding to become a major builder of sailboats. A total of 6,100 boats have been completed and it remains in production.

==Design==
The Lido 14 is a recreational sailboat, built predominantly of fiberglass, with wood trim. It has a fractional sloop rig, with gold-colored anodized aluminum spars and a loose-footed mainsail. The hull features a spooned plumb stem, a near-vertical transom, a transom-hung rudder controlled by a tiller and a retractable centerboard that is raised with stainless steel straps. Both the rudder and centerboard are made from foam-cored fiberglass. It displaces  and has positive flotation under the seats and in the bow compartment.

In 1995 the boat was redesigned with a new two-piece mold to simplify construction, plus many other changes.

The boat has a draft of  with the centerboard extended and  with it retracted, allowing beaching or ground transportation on a trailer.

For sailing the design is equipped with a 2:1 mechanical advantage outhaul and a boom vang. The jib has a padded eye for a whisker pole, which is a factory option, along with hiking straps.

The design as used as a one-design racer and has a Portsmouth Yardstick racing average handicap of 99.6. It has a large cockpit that can accommodate six adults, but it is raced with a crew of two sailors.

==Operational history==
In a 1994 review Richard Sherwood described the boat as a "child’s boat, racer and sailer. The Lido 14 evolved from the earlier Lehman 14 via a rather complete redesign including sheer, seats, foredeck, and sail plan. The cockpit length allows for six adults on full-length seats. The seats, with a bow compartment, provide flotation. Only limited modifications are allowed for racing, as the intention is to keep Lido a simple, limited boat."

==See also==
*List of sailing boat types

