Title: Winfield Township School District



The Winfield Township School District is a community public school district that serves students in pre-Kindergarten to eighth grade from Winfield Township in Union County, New Jersey, United States.

As of the 2018–19 school year, the district, comprising one school, had an enrollment of 139 students and 18.0 classroom teachers (on an FTE basis), for a student–teacher ratio of 7.7:1.District information for Winfield Township, National Center for Education Statistics. Accessed April 1, 2020.  In the 2016–17 school year, Winfield had the 19th-smallest enrollment of any school district in the state, with 140 students.Guion, Payton. "These 43 N.J. school districts have fewer than 200 students", NJ Advance Media for NJ.com, September 2017. Accessed January 30, 2020. "Based on data from the state Department of Education from the last school year and the Census Bureau, NJ Advance Media made a list of the smallest of the small school districts in the state, excluding charter schools and specialty institutions.... 19. Winfield Township; Enrollment: 140; Grades: Pre-K-8; County: Union"

The district is classified by the New Jersey Department of Education as being in District Factor Group "B", the second-lowest of eight groupings. District Factor Groups organize districts statewide to allow comparison by common socioeconomic characteristics of the local districts. From lowest socioeconomic status to highest, the categories are A, B, CD, DE, FG, GH, I and J.NJ Department of Education District Factor Groups (DFG) for School Districts, New Jersey Department of Education. Accessed September 30, 2014.

Public school students in ninth through twelfth grades attend David Brearley High School in Kenilworth, as part of a sending/receiving relationship with the Kenilworth Public Schools.David Brearly Middle/High School 2016 School Report Card, New Jersey Department of Education. Accessed June 23, 2020. "David Brearley Middle-High School serves students in Grades 7-12 from Kenilworth, Winfield, and surrounding communities that who participate in the School Choice Program." As of the 2018–19 school year, the high school had an enrollment of 757 students and 63.5 classroom teachers (on an FTE basis), for a student–teacher ratio of 11.9:1.School data for David Brearley Middle/High School, National Center for Education Statistics. Accessed April 1, 2020.

Before the current sending relationship had been established with Brearley, students had attended Rahway High School until a decision by the New Jersey Department of Education in March 2000 allowed for termination of the relationship.Commissioner of Education's Decision in Board of Education of the Township of Winfield, Union County v. Board of Education of the City of Rahway, Union County, New Jersey Department of Education, March 2, 2000. Accessed June 23, 2020. "Accordingly, the Initial Decision is adopted as the final decision in this matter for the reasons expressed therein. Winfield's application for severance of its sending-receiving relationship with Rahway is hereby granted, subject to its entering into a new sending-receiving relationship with Kenilworth for a minimum of five years. Withdrawal shall be phased out over a four-year period, beginning with the incoming 9th grade class in September 2000."

==School==
Winfield School serves students in pre-kindergarten through eighth grade, including classes for students with special needs.New Jersey School Directory for the Winfield Township School District, New Jersey Department of Education. Accessed December 29, 2016. The school had 135 students enrolled as of the 2018–19 school year.School Data for the Winfield Township School District, National Center for Education Statistics. Accessed April 1, 2020.

The Winfield School fields both boys and girls sports teams. Sports offered include soccer, basketball, street hockey (sponsored by the New Jersey Devils), and baseball / softball. In 2006, the boys' basketball team was undefeated. In 2007, both the girls and boys' basketball teams were undefeated, the first time in Winfield history both teams were undefeated in the same year.

==Administration==
Core members of the district's administration are:Administration / Office Staff, Winfield Township School. Accessed June 23, 2020.New Jersey School Directory for Union County, New Jersey Department of Education. Accessed December 29, 2016.
*Ross LeBrun, Superintendent / Principal
*Danielle Tarvin-Griffith, Business Administrator / Board Secretary

==Board of education==
The district's board of education, with nine members, sets policy and oversees the fiscal and educational operation of the district through its administration. As a Type II school district, the board's trustees are elected directly by voters to serve three-year terms of office on a staggered basis, with three seats up for election each year held (since 2012) as part of the November general election. The board appoints a superintendent to oversee the day-to-day operation of the district.New Jersey Boards of Education by District Election Types - 2018 School Election, New Jersey Department of Education, updated February 16, 2018. Accessed January 26, 2020.Comprehensive Annual Financial Report of the Winfield Township School District, New Jersey Department of Education, for year ending June 30, 2019. Accessed June 23, 2020. "An elected nine-member Board of Education (the “Board”) serves as the policy maker for the District. The Board adopts an annual budget and directly approves all expenditures which serve as the basis for control over and authorization for all expenditures of the School District tax money."Board of Education, Winfield Township School District. Accessed June 23, 2020.

