Title: Rudolf Pernický

Rudolf Pernický (1 July  1915, Krhová, Valašské Meziříčí – 21 December 2005, Prague) was a Czechoslovakian soldier and paratrooper. He fled Czechoslovakia after the 1939 annexation of Bohemia and Moravia by Nazi Germany, eventually settling in the United Kingdom. There he worked for the Czechoslovak Government-in-Exile and trained paratroopers being dropped into the Protectorate of Bohemia and Moravia. Later in December 1944 he was parachuted together with rotmistr Leopold Musil into the Protectorate to support the home Czech resistance movement (operation codename Tungsten) – unfortunately 100 km away from their original target. They both survived seven-day march through the snow-covered terrain avoiding any contact (carrying a radio beacon and other illegal material) and before World War II ended they actively organized the resistance movement around Nové Město na Moravě.

After the liberation of Czechoslovakia he joined the Czechoslovak Army at the general staff and graduated from the military academy. But shortly after the communistic takeover in 1948 he was arrested and in a political trial sentenced to 20 years in prison. He got to the worst communistic forced labour camps (as Příbram, Jáchymov etc.) and was amnestied as late as 1960. However till the end of communistic regime he was still persecuted and allowed only for the manual labour employment. After that he was fully rehabilitated, given back all his honours and the rank of army general. He was also elected as the first chairman of Confederation of political prisoners and after his term ended he remain an honorary chairman.

On 28 October  2005 he was decorated by the president of the Czech Republic with the highest Czech order – the Order of the White Lion, 1st class. As being seriously ill (he passed already a serious operation only a week before the ceremony) this was his last public appearance, he died few weeks later on 21 December, on the 61st anniversary of the air-landing to his country.

== External links ==
* Radio Prague: Anti-Nazi resistance hero, Rudolf Pernicky, dies aged 90
* Photo of Rudolf Pernický from the 28. October 2005 awarding ceremony at the Prague castle






Category:1915 births
Category:2005 deaths
Category:People from Valašské Meziříčí
Category:Czech generals
Category:Czechoslovak soldiers
Category:Czechoslovak military personnel of World War II
Category:Recipients of the Order of the White Lion
Category:Recipients of the Milan Rastislav Stefanik Order