Title: River Doe




The River Doe is a river in North Yorkshire, England. The river's source is near God's Bridge close to the settlement of Chapel-le-Dale and flows through Twisleton in a south-westerly direction to Ingleton, where it meets the River Twiss to form the River Greta. The river forms part of the River Lune system that flows into the Irish Sea.

==Course==
 
The source of the river is found at a place named God's Bridge where Chapel Beck disappears underground and the Doe begins. The river flows south west, fed by a number of small unnamed springs on the valley sides. The first named tributary is Light Water Spring which feeds north west into the river near a disused quarry. Near Twisleton Dale House, the river can be crossed by some stepping stones at a fording point as well as some  later near the disused granite quarry. Further down stream near Twisleton Hall there are another set of stepping stones at a fording point just above Beezley Falls. After flowing under a footbridge, there are another set of falls, Snow Falls, just below the quarry which is operated by Hanson. The river continues past several disused quarries and a footbridge until it reaches the town of Ingleton where it forms a confluence with the River Twiss.

==Falls==

Beezley Falls are reached approximately  from the source at God's Bridge. These falls consist of a series of cascades, including the triple spout, running through Baxengyhll Gorge. Rival Falls  has a plunge pool known as the Black Hole. The steepest drops are between  and  approximately. Snow Falls are situated in the lower gorge about  downstream and has similar drops.

==Geology==

The main rock of the river valley is turbidite sandstone with some siltstone which are prevalent in the waterfalls and plunge pools. These lay on a bed of Precambrian sedimentary rock which show evidence of its oceanic origins in the ripple and folding marks on exposed surfaces.

==Habitat==

The river is home to Brown trout. From Beezley falls to Snow falls, the sides of the gorge are lined with a variety of trees and shrubs.

==Gallery==


