Title: Phacelia campanularia


Phacelia campanularia is a species of flowering plant in the borage family, Boraginaceae, known by the common names desertbells, desert bluebells,Phacelia campanularia. Calflora. California-bluebell, desert scorpionweed, and desert Canterbury bells.Phacelia campanularia. Lady Bird Johnson Wildflower Center. University of Texas at Austin. Its true native range is within the borders of California, in the Mojave and Sonoran Deserts, but it is commonly cultivated as an ornamental plant and it can be found growing elsewherePhacelia campanularia. USDA PLANTS. as an introduced species.

==Description==
This annual herb has an erect stem reaching  in maximum height. It is covered in glandular hairs. The leaf blades are somewhat rounded with toothed edges. The inflorescence is a loose cyme of flowers. The flower has a bright blue corolla up to 4 centimeters long which can be bell-shaped, funnel-shaped, or round and flattened. It can have white spots in the throat. The protruding stamens and style can be 4.5 centimeters long. The fruit is a capsule up to 1.5 centimeters long.Phacelia campanularia. The Jepson Manual. It grows in dry, sandy places below .

==Taxonomy==
Two subtaxa are usually recognized, called subspecies or varieties. They can intergrade in some areas.
*Phacelia campanularia ssp. campanularia – limited to the Sonoran Desert
*Phacelia campanularia ssp. vasiformis – more common, with a wider range, and sometimes with larger flowers

==Chemistry==
The anthocyanin pigment phacelianin was isolated from the flowers of this species and is involved in the formation of their blue color. It is also responsible for the blue of the flowers of Evolvulus pilosus.Mori, M., et al. (2006). Structure of anthocyanin from the blue petals of Phacelia campanularia and its blue flower color development. Phytochemistry 67(6), 622-29.

The juice, sap, or hairs may cause irritation or a skin rash and should be washed from skin as soon as possible.

==Gallery==



Phacelia campanularia 2003-05-12.jpg|Form
Phacelia campanularia seedlings.jpg|Seedlings
Phacelia campanularia purple flower.jpg|Flower
Phacelia campanularia vasiformis.jpg|ssp. vasiformis


