Title: Marshall Lightowlers
Professor Marshall Lightowlers began his career in the field of parasitology during a post-doctoral appointment at the Institute of Medical and Veterinary Science in Adelaide where he undertook research on ovine sarcocystosis. In 1981 he began a post-doctoral position at The University of Melbourne, Veterinary Clinical Centre and commenced a research career focusing on the immunology and molecular biology of taeniid cestode parasites. His initial research at the University of Melbourne investigated the immunochemistry of antigens of Taenia taeniaeformis and Echinococcus granulosus. Subsequently he was a member of a team of scientists that developed a vaccine against Taenia ovis infection in sheep,Johnson, K.S., Harrison, G.B., Lightowlers, M.W., O'Hoy, K.L., Cougle, W.G., Dempster, R.P., Lawrence, S.B., Vinton, J.G., Heath, D.D. & Rickard, M.D., 1989. Vaccination against ovine cysticercosis using a defined recombinant antigen. Nature, 338, 585-587. the first recombinant vaccine against a parasitic disease.Cox, F.E.G., 1993. Milestones in parasitology. Parasitology Today 9, 347-348. In 1989 Lightowlers took over leadership of the molecular parasitology research laboratories at the University of Melbourne and began applying the lessons learnt with T. ovis to the development of similar vaccines against infection with the larval stages of other cestode parasites. This led to the development of highly effective, recombinant vaccines against cysticercosis in cattle due to Taenia saginata (TSA9/TSA18)Lightowlers, M.W., Rolfe, R. & Gauci, C.G., 1996. Taenia saginata: vaccination against cysticercosis in cattle with recombinant oncosphere antigens. Experimental Parasitology 84, 330-338. and in pigs due to Taenia solium.Flisser, A., Gauci, C.G., Zoli, A., Martinez-Ocana, J., Garza-Rodriguez, A., Dominguez-Alpizar, J.L., Maravilla, P., Rodriguez-Canul, R., Avila, G., Aguilar-Vega, L., Kyngdon, C., Geerts, S. & Lightowlers, M.W., 2004. Induction of protection against porcine cysticercosis by vaccination with recombinant oncosphere antigens. Infection & Immunity 72, 5292-5297.Gonzalez, A.E., Gauci, C.G., Barber, D., Gilman, R.H., Tsang, V.C., Garcia, H.H., Verastegui, M. & Lightowlers, M.W., 2005. Vaccination of pigs to control human neurocysticercosis. American Journal of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene 72, 837-839. In collaboration with Dr David Heath at the Wallaceville Animal Research Centre in New Zealand, he and his colleagues also developed the EG95 recombinant vaccine against cystic echinococcosis (hydatid disease).Lightowlers, M.W., Lawrence, S.B., Gauci, C.G., Young, J., Ralston, M.J., Maas, D. & Health, D.D., 1996. Vaccination against hydatidosis using a defined recombinant antigen. Parasite Immunology 18, 457-462.

The E. granulosus and T. solium vaccines could potentially have been developed for use directly in humans, however due to the parasites’ medical impact being restricted largely to developing countries, funding was not forthcoming, hence they were developed for use in the parasites’ natural animal intermediate hosts. Use of the vaccines in this way would reduce the parasites' transmission and, indirectly, the incidence of cystic echinococcosis and neurocysticercosis in humans.

The EG95 vaccine was proven successful in experimental trials in sheep against E. granulosus infection carried out in Argentina, China, Romania, Iran, New Zealand and Australia.Lightowlers, M.W., 2006. Cestode vaccines: origins, current status and future prospects. Parasitology 133, S27-42. The vaccine was registered as a commercial product in China in 2007 by Chongqing Auleon Biologicals Co., Ltd., and in Argentina in 2011 by Tecnovax Sanidad Animal.  In 2016 the EG95 vaccine was incorporated into the Chinese National Echinococcosis Control Program and National Animal Disease Compulsory Immunization Program.Yuan, R., Wu, H., Zeng, H., Liu, P., Xu, Q., Gao, L., Li, Y., Li, R., Huang, D., Yu, C. & Sun, X., 2017. Prevalence of and risk factors for cystic echinococcosis among herding families in five provinces in western China: a cross-sectional study. Oncotarget 8, 91568-91576.

The TSOL18 vaccine against Taenia solium achieved >99% protection in experimental trials undertaken in pigs in Mexico, Cameroon and Peru. It has been developed as a commercial product, Cysvax, by Indian Immunologicals Limited and registered in India in 2016.  The TSOL18 vaccine played an important role in a large-scale, successful, cysticercosis elimination program undertaken in the Tumbes region of northern Peru.Garcia, H.H., Gonzalez, A.E., Tsang, V.C., O'Neal, S.E., Llanos-Zavalaga, F., Gonzalvez, G., Romero, J., Rodriguez, S., Moyano, L.M., Ayvar, V., Diaz, A., Hightower, A., Craig, P.S., Lightowlers, M.W., Gauci, C.G., Leontsini, E., Gilman, R.H., Cysticercosis Working Group in, P., 2016. Elimination of Taenia solium transmission in Northern Peru. New England Journal of Medicine 374, 2335-2344. The vaccine has completed the clinical trials in Nepal and has shown to be effective to control cysticercosis in pigs of the region.

Marshall Lightowlers is Principal Research Fellow with the National Health and Medical Research Council in Australia and Professor in the Faculty of Veterinary and Agricultural Sciences at the University of Melbourne. In 2011 he was appointed by the University of Melbourne Council as Melbourne Laureate Professor. He has published more than two hundred articles in internationally refereed journals and books. He has been an active member of the Australian Society for Parasitology, serving as the society's President in 1995/6, Honorary Secretary, and as a council member representing Victoria. In 1998 the society awarded Lightowlers the Bancroft-Mackerras Medal in recognition of his outstanding contribution to the science of parasitology.

