Title: Al Unser (baseball)

Albert Bernard Unser (October 12, 1912 – July 7, 1995) was a Major League Baseball catcher who played for the Detroit Tigers (1942–1944) and Cincinnati Reds (1945). He was a native of Morrisonville, Illinois and the father of MLB center fielder Del Unser.

==Biography==
Although Unser's major league career was short, he had a lengthy career in minor league baseball. He began his professional career in , playing for three different minor league teams that season. He was picked up by the St. Louis Cardinals organization in , playing in their farm system until . In , he served as manager of the class-D Gastonia Cardinals of the Tar Heel League, guiding them to the league championship.

In , Unser joined the Tigers' farm system, spending that season with the Beaumont Exporters of the Texas League. He spent most of the  season as a player-manager with the Winston-Salem Twins of the Piedmont League, and at the end of the season he joined the major league club. Unser became one of many baseball players who only appeared in the major leagues during World War II, making his major league debut at age 29 on September 14, 1942, in a home game against the Washington Senators at Briggs Stadium.

Over the next two seasons, Unser played sparingly for Detroit, spending part of each season in the minors with the Buffalo Bisons. The following season, he joined the Reds, where he had his best season in . In his only full season in the majors, Unser batted .265 in 67 games with 3 home runs and 21 runs batted in (RBI). His career MLB totals for 120 games include a .251 batting average (85-for-338), 4 home runs, 30 RBI, 41 runs, .322 on-base percentage, and a slugging percentage of .355.

In , Unser returned to the minor leagues with the Hollywood Stars of the Pacific Coast League, spending two seasons with the club. In , he played with the Tulsa Oilers, then returned to the Stars in . In , he played with the minor league Baltimore Orioles, then played for the minor league Milwaukee Brewers the next two seasons. In , he was named the Most Valuable Player of the American Association, batting .293 with 17 home runs. In , Unser returned to managing, serving as player-manager for the Austin Pioneers of the Big State League.

After splitting  among three teams, he returned to the Cardinals organization as essentially a full-time manager and occasional player. While managing the Midwest League Decatur Commodores from 1955 to 1957, he appeared in just 11 and 7 games in the first two seasons, and just a single game in 1957. That year, Unser won his second league championship as a manager. In , he managed the Winston-Salem Red Birds, then spent the next two seasons managing the Keokuk Cardinals. He made his last appearance as a player for Keokuk in  at age 48. He managed one last season in the Milwaukee Braves farm system in , taking the helm of the Boise Braves. He later served as a scout for the Braves and the Cleveland Indians.

Unser died at the age of 82 in Decatur, Illinois.

==External links==

*Retrosheet
*




Category:1912 births
Category:1995 deaths
Category:American Association (1902–1997) MVP Award winners
Category:Atlanta Braves scouts
Category:Augusta Rams players
Category:Austin Pioneers players
Category:Baseball players from Illinois
Category:Beaumont Exporters players
Category:Buffalo Bisons (minor league) players
Category:Cedar Rapids Indians players
Category:Cincinnati Reds players
Category:Cleveland Indians scouts
Category:Columbus Red Birds players
Category:Dayton Ducks players
Category:Decatur Commodores players
Category:Detroit Tigers players
Category:Gastonia Cardinals players
Category:Hollywood Stars players
Category:Jacksonville Jax players
Category:Keokuk Cardinals players
Category:Lufkin Lumbermen players
Category:Major League Baseball catchers
Category:Milwaukee Braves scouts
Category:Milwaukee Brewers (minor league) players
Category:Minor league baseball managers
Category:Mobile Shippers players
Category:Paris Pirates players
Category:Scranton Miners players
Category:Sioux City Soos players
Category:Sportspeople from Decatur, Illinois
Category:Tulsa Oilers (baseball) players
Category:Winston-Salem Twins players