Title: Pierre François Olive Rayerthumb|Pierre François Olive Rayer
Pierre François Olive Rayer (8 March 1793 – 10 September 1867) was a French physician who was a native of Saint Sylvain. He made important contributions in the fields of pathological anatomy, physiology, comparative pathology and parasitology.

== Biography ==
He studied medicine at Caen, and afterwards in Paris at the Ecole Pratique des Hautes Etudes and at the Hôtel-Dieu. He became an interne of medicine in 1813, and in 1818 earned his medical doctorate. Later on, he became a physician at Hôpital Saint-Antoine (1825), and at the Hôpital de la Charité (1832), and was also a consultant-physician to King Louis-Philippe. In 1862 he attained the chair of comparative anatomy and was named dean of the Faculty of Medicine at Paris.Pierre-François-Olive Rayer @ Who Named It

In 1837 Rayer discovered that the fatal equine disease known as glanders was contagious to other species, including humans.  Between 1837 and 1841 he published a three-volume book on diseases of the kidney titled Traité des maladies des reins. In 1850 Rayer published a paper that provided the first description of the anthrax bacillus (Inoculation du sang de rate, 1850).Heinrich Hermann Robert Koch - bibliography Who Named It In this work he documented studies that he performed with physician Casimir Davaine (1812-1882) in regards to Bacillus anthracis.Pierre François Olive Rayer (1850) “Inoculation du sang de rate”, Comptes rendus des séances et mémoires de la Société de biologie, vol. 2, pages 141-144. He was elected a Foreign Honorary Member of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences in 1855.

Rayer was a member of the Académie de Médecine and the Académie des Sciences, and co-founder of the Société de biologie, of which he was also president. He maintained friendships with several influential people in France, that included naturalist Isidore Geoffroy Saint-Hilaire, novelist George Sand and philosopher Émile Littré.

== Eponyms associated with Pierre Rayer ==
* Rayer's disease: A disorder characterized by chronic jaundice, splenomegaly, and hepatomegaly. 
* Rayer's nodules: A xanthoma; yellowish nodules on the skin (often on the eyelids).

== See also ==
* Timeline of tuberous sclerosis

== References ==


* 

== External links ==
* Images from Traité théorique et pratique des maladies de la peau From The College of Physicians of Philadelphia Digital Library




Category:1793 births
Category:1867 deaths
Category:People from Calvados (department)
Category:French dermatologists
Category:French pathologists
Category:Academic staff of the University of Paris
Category:Fellows of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences
Category:Members of the French Academy of Sciences
Category:Grand Officiers of the Légion d'honneur