Title: Dorking Deepdene railway station




Dorking Deepdene railway station is a railway station in the town of Dorking, Surrey, England. Located on the North Downs Line, it lies  from  (via ). The station is one of three within Dorking, alongside  (elsewhere on the North Downs line) and  (on the Mole Valley line). The station is within walking distance of Dorking stationDorking Deepdene  – National Rail Enquiries and interchange on a through ticket is permitted.

Dorking Deepdene is managed by Great Western Railway, which also operates all services through the station.

The station has two platforms, each long enough to accommodate a four-carriage train. It is unstaffed and has no ticket office.Station facilities for Dorking Deepdene  – National Rail Enquiries Tickets can be bought on trains, at the automatic ticket machine at the entrance to the station, or at the ticket office at nearby Dorking station, which sells tickets for all National Rail services.Station facilities for Dorking  – National Rail Enquiries The station is located on an embankment above street level and the platforms can only be reached by steps; passengers who require step-free access are advised to instead use Dorking West station, approximately  to the west, which is fully wheelchair-accessible.Station facilities for Dorking West  – National Rail Enquiries

==History==
The Reading, Guildford and Reigate Railway (RG&RR) was authorised in 1846 and opened in stages. One of the first parts to open was between  and Dorking, on 4 July 1849; the terminus was at the present-day Dorking West station.

thumb|left|Redhill - Reading train in 1964
A second station in Dorking (what is now Dorking Deepdene) was not built until 1 February 1851; when it opened, it was originally named "Box Hill and Leatherhead Road" and it was shortened to "Box Hill" in March the same year. The RG&RR was soon absorbed by the South Eastern Railway (SER).

The station at Box Hill was temporarily closed from 1 January 1917, and reopened on 1 January 1919. In the 1923 grouping the SER became part of the new Southern Railway, which on 9 June of that year renamed the station "Deepdene" to avoid confusion with  station. On 11 May 1987 British Railways renamed the station "Dorking (Deepdene)".



==Services==

The typical off-peak service pattern (Monday to Sunday) is two trains per hour each way between  and ; one train per hour continues beyond Redhill to and from .Train Times and Timetables  – Great Western Railway Services to and from Gatwick call only at principal stations en route, while those to and from Redhill stop at most intermediate stations in both directions. Service frequency is reduced to hourly or two-hourly during the evenings.





==Future proposals==
In November 2018, a £21 million upgrade of Dorking Deepdene station was proposed by the Dorking Town Forum, who submitted a nomination for funding from Network Rail.Access for All, Deepdene station, 2018 November 19th – Dorking Town Forum The proposal includes:
* relocation of the platforms east of the current site (immediately west of the bridge over the Mole Valley line);
* construction of two new lifts, to allow step-free access to both platforms, and a pair of new waiting rooms;
* a direct foot link between Dorking Deepdene and  stations, by means of a new -long walkway constructed along the western edge of the Mole Valley line.

