Title: Paul Lisicky

Paul Lisicky (born July 9, 1959) is an American novelist and memoirist. He is an associate professor in the MFA Program at Rutgers University-Camden, and the author of several books.

==Early life==
Paul Lisicky was born on July 9, 1959. He grew up in Cherry Hill, New Jersey.Korman, Nina. "Lawnboy's Own Story: The Miami Book Fair International", Miami New Times, November 11, 1999. Accessed November 29, 2008. "Lisicky's book, a six-year project, is an evocative, sensitively rendered portrait of a young gay man coming of age in our parts. The author grew up in Cherry Hill, New Jersey, lives most of the year in Houston, Texas, where he teaches, and spends the summers in Provincetown, Massachusetts." He graduated from Rutgers University-New Brunswick, earned an MA from Rutgers University-Camden and an MFA from the Iowa Writers' Workshop.

==Career==
Lisicky taught in the creative writing programs at Cornell University, New York University, Rutgers University-Newark, Sarah Lawrence College, the University of North Carolina Wilmington, and elsewhere. He is now an associate professor in the MFA Program at Rutgers University-Camden.

Lisicky is the author of six books: Lawnboy, Famous Builder, The Burning House, Unbuilt Projects, The Narrow Door, and Later: My Life at the Edge of the World.

His work has appeared in The Atlantic, Conjunctions, Ecotone, Fence, The New York Times, The Offing, Ploughshares, Tin House, and in many other magazines and anthologies. His awards include fellowships from the Guggenheim Foundation, the National Endowment for the Arts, the James Michener/Copernicus Society, the Corporation of Yaddo, and the Fine Arts Work Center in Provincetown, where he was twice a Fellow. He is the editor of StoryQuarterly and serves on the Writing Committee of the Fine Arts Work Center in Provincetown.

In 2021, Paul Lisicky appeared on Storybound (podcast) reading an excerpt from Later : my life at the edge of the world, with music sampled from Jordan Warmack.

==Personal life==
Lisicky lives in Brooklyn, New York City. From 1995 until 2011, his partner was the writer Mark Doty. They were married in 2008 and divorced in 2013.Guthmann, Edward. "Memories Of a Lost Childhood", San Francisco Chronicle, November 3, 1999. Accessed October 16, 2007. "His partner of four years, novelist Paul Lisicky (Lawnboy), travels with him and provided a valuable sounding board during the writing of Firebird."

==See also==
* Literary analysis
* LGBT culture in New York City
* List of LGBT people from New York City

