Title: Kara Musa Pasha







Kara Musa Pasha ("Musa Pasha the Courageous" in Turkish; died 1649)Süreyya, Bey Mehmet, Nuri Akbayar, and Seyit Ali. Kahraman. Sicill-i Osmanî. Beşiktaş, İstanbul: Kültür Bakanlığı Ile Türkiye Ekonomik Ve Toplumsal Tarih Vakfı'nın Ortak Yayınıdır, 1890. Print. was an Ottoman soldier and statesman of Bosnian origin who was named grand vizier by Sultan Ibrahim I 16 September 1647 after Nevesinli Salih Pasha's execution, holding the office for only five days until 21 September. He also held the office of Kapudan Pasha (Grand Admiral of the Ottoman Navy) in 1647. He was trained in Enderûn.Uluçam, Müjdat,  "Musa Paşa (Kara)" (1999) Yaşamları ve Yapıtlarıyla Osmanlılar Ansiklopedisi, C.2 s.261, İstanbul:Yapı Kredi Kültür Yayıncılık A.Ş. ISBN 975-08-0071-01

His first meeting with sultan Murad IV was in 1630. Later on in his life, he became a member of Sublime Porte/Divan (the Ottoman government council) and was selected three times to serve as deputy of the Budin Eyalet. There in 1643, he reportedly received an endowment for the construction of the Musa-Pasha Mosque in Nova Kasaba, Bosnia and Herzegovina. During the Crete war campaign, after the death of the previous incumbent Koca Musa Pasha, Kara Musa Pasha received the title of Kapudan Pasha in 1647. When he invaded the city of Rethymno in Crete, he had a church there converted into a mosque, which still stands as "Kara Musa Pasha Mosque." However, because of lack of many successes, he was dismissed from the role of Kapudan Pasha soon afterwards.

Also while he was fighting in the war, the imperial seal signifying his promotion to grand vizier was sent to him by sea. After having received the news of his promotion, but not having yet received the seal, he was passed over for grand vizier because of the influence of Hezarpare Ahmet Pasha over the sultan, who instead chose Hezarpare Ahmet Pasha as grand vizier.

In the beginning of the same year of 1647, he had married Şekerpare Hatun, a lady in waiting and a favorite of the sultan, which was the very reason for his appointment as Grand Admiral.

In December 1647, Kara Musa Pasha was made the governor of Baghdad Eyalet. He held this post for just over a year until January 1649, when he was dismissed and returned to Constantinople. He was executed sometime that year on the orders of queen regent Kösem Sultan, in turn upon the advice of her advisers and grand vizier.

==See also==
* List of Ottoman Grand Viziers
* List of Kapudan Pashas

==Footnotes==










Category:1649 deaths
Category:Pashas
Category:17th-century Grand Viziers of the Ottoman Empire
Category:Year of birth unknown
Category:People from Foča
Category:Kapudan Pashas
Category:Executed people from the Ottoman Empire
Category:17th-century executions by the Ottoman Empire
Category:People from the Ottoman Empire of Bosnian descent
Category:Ottoman governors of Baghdad
Category:Ottoman people of the Ottoman–Venetian Wars