Title: Crown College (Tennessee)


Crown College is a independent Baptist Bible college, trade school, seminary, language school, and music conservatory in Powell, Tennessee.

== History ==
Clarence Sexton founded Crown College in 1991.  The faculty and students of Crown College agree to uphold the Crown Code, Crown's philosophy of education, and their statement of faith, all of which are based on the Bible.What We Believe

Crown College is nationally accredited by the Transnational Association of Christian Colleges and Schools.  Crown College is also authorized for operation as a postsecondary educational institution by the Tennessee Higher Education Commission.Authorized Institution Listing , Tennessee Higher Education Commission website, accessed July 14, 2015

Crown College is home to the one-of-a-kind Crown Christian Heritage Center. This center encompasses 30,000 sq. ft. within the main campus and includes hundreds of displays highlighting the lives of Christian men and women who contributed greatly to the cause of Christ.

==Academics==

The college offers the Bachelor of Biblical Studies degree, with concentrations in pastoral ministry, youth ministry, missions, music ministry,The School of Ministry  Christian education,The School of Education business,The School of Business trades and technology,Crown School of Trades and Technology a Christian Life Certificate,Christian Life Certificate and opportunities for individual study through online programs, the school of International Language Navigators,International Language Navigators and the Crown Music Conservatory.the Crown Music Conservatory The Crown Seminary offers the M.C.E., M.S.M., M.Min., M.B.S., and M.Div. degrees.Request Information website  The college also has an auxiliary campus in Birmingham, England.Crown UK 

==Student life==
The main campus in Powell was formerly a Levi Strauss manufacturing plant that was extensively renovated for use as a college. The new campus employs the neo-classical architectural design. Located on this campus are classrooms, the Crown Bookshop,the Crown Bookshop the Crown Music Conservatory,  the Lee Roberson Christian Heritage Center, the Great Hall dining area, and the campus library.Campus Life Student housing is available on the campus of Temple Baptist Church and at the North Campus just a few miles away.Housing and Dining

The Crown College is a member of the United States Collegiate Athletic Association (USCAA) Division II, and fields teams in men's basketball, men's soccer, and women's volleyball. The Crown College Choir Crown College Choir is a signature of the college, having performed across the United States and the United Kingdom.

The Crown College is affiliated with three summer camps: Mount Moriah Christian Camp in Powell, TN,Mount Moriah Christian Camp Lake Texoma Baptist Youth Camp in Pottsboro, TX,Lake Texoma Baptist Youth Camp and Camp Victory near Birmingham, England.

==Crown Christian Publications==
Crown Christian Publications is based in The Crown College, and is a ministry of Temple Baptist ChurchTemple Baptist Church in Powell. Crown Christian Publications is a small publisher that specializes in books on Christian living and devotionals. Many of the books are written by the college's president, Dr. Clarence Sexton.

==Notes==


==External links==
* Crown College (Official Site)
* Temple Baptist Church
* Faith for the Family
* Crown Christian Publications



Category:Independent Baptist universities and colleges in the United States
Category:Baptist Christianity in Tennessee
Category:Seminaries and theological colleges in Tennessee
Category:Education in Knox County, Tennessee
Category:Knoxville metropolitan area
Category:Bible colleges
Category:Educational institutions established in 1991
Category:Buildings and structures in Knox County, Tennessee
Category:1991 establishments in Tennessee
Category:Transnational Association of Christian Colleges and Schools